Attested TLS APIs proposal (#4138)
openenclave/openenclave: docs/DesignDocs/AttestedTLSAPIs.md

Attested TLS APIs
==========================

Motivation
------------

An important use case for an enclave is establishing an attested
TLS channel. The attested TLS channel allows a remote party
to authenticate the enclave identity during a TLS handshake,
which bridges the data-in-use and data-in-transit protection.
The Open Enclave SDK demonstrates this use case in the
[attested TLS samples](/samples/attested_tls) with the use of two
APIs, `oe_get_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` and
`oe_verify_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2`.
The `oe_get_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` API allows
a developer to obtain a self-signed certificate with the enclave
evidence embedded, which then is used during the TLS handshake.
More importantly, the API binds the public key of the certificate
with evidence such that the TLS channel based on the public key
can be *attested*. To validate the certificate, the receiver uses the
`oe_verify_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` API, which
assesses the trustworthiness of the evidence (e.g., based on the DCAP client for SGX).

> In addition, the API outputs a list of claims, allowing the developer

Reviewer: Since the receiver is a relying party, not a verifier, clarify that the list of claims returned is
NOT the list of claims in the evidence, it's a list of claims from the attestation result returned by the verifier.

`oe_verify_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2`.
The `oe_get_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` API
allows a developer to obtain a self-signed certificate with
the enclave evidence embedded, which then is used during
the TLS handshake. More importantly, the API binds the
public key of the certificate with the evidence such that
the TLS channel based on the public key can be *attested*.
To validate the certificate, the receiver uses the
`oe_verify_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` API,
which assesses the trustworthiness of the evidence
(based on the DCAP client). In addition, the API outputs a
list of claims, allowing the developer to implement additional
verification logic (e.g., authenticate the enclave identity such as `MRENCLAVE` in SGX).
After a successful validation, the receiver continues the handshake
and finally establishes an *attested* secure channel with the sender.

While the two APIs are useful in the above end-to-end scenario,
they have the following limitations:

- Do not to support general use cases

  A typical attestation procedure includes three roles: an attester, a relying party,
  and a verifier. Two general models are as follows

>   (refer to [Remote Attestation Procedures Architecture](https://github.com/ietf-rats-wg/architecture/blob/master/draft-ietf-rats-architecture.md)

Reviewer: A better URI is probably https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-rats-architecture

The Open Enclave SDK demonstrates this use case in the
the [attested TLS samples](/samples/attested_tls) with the use
of two APIs, `oe_get_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` and
`oe_verify_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2`.
The `oe_get_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` API
allows a developer to obtain a self-signed certificate with
the enclave evidence embedded, which then is used during
the TLS handshake. More importantly, the API binds the
public key of the certificate with the evidence such that
the TLS channel based on the public key can be *attested*.
To validate the certificate, the receiver uses the
`oe_verify_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2`
API, which assesses the trustworthiness of the evidence
(based on the DCAP client). In addition, the API outputs a
list of claims, allowing the developer to implement additional
verification logic (e.g., authenticate the enclave identity, or `MRENCLAVE`).
After a successful validation, the receiver continues the handshake
and finally establishes an *attested* secure channel with the sender.

While the two APIs are useful in the above end-to-end scenario,

> they have the following limitations:

Reviewer: Line 38 links to it now

> - Fail to support general use cases

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Does not support general use cases
```

  A typical attestation procedure includes three roles: an attester, a relying party,
  and a verifier. Two general models are as follows.
  - Passport Model

    The attester generates the evidence and asks the verifier to assess the
    trustworthiness of the evidence. Then, the attester sends the attestation results
    to the relying party. Finally, the relying party validates the attestation results
    based on customized policies.

  - Background-Check Model

    The attester generates the evidence and directly sends the evidence to the
    relying party. The relying party then asks the verifier to assess the trustworthiness
    of the evidence and then validates the attestation results based on customized policies.

  The APIs, however, only support the special case of the background-check model where

>   the sender of the certificate is the attester and the receiver of the certificate plays

Author: No. An example of attestation results are MAA tokens, which will be embedded into the certificate.

  the roles of both the verifier and the relying party. More specifically, the
  `oe_get_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` API internally obtains
  the raw enclave evidence and embeds it into the output certificate while the
  `oe_verify_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` API takes the certificate
  as input, extracts and verifies the evidence internally based on the local DCAP
  client, and outputs the list of the claims. As a result, neither can the sender
  embed the attestation results into the certificate nor can the receiver extract
  the raw evidence from the certificate and ask the verifier to assess the evidence,
  thus failing to support the two abovementioned models.

- Lack of support of init-time custom claims

  According to [Open Enclave Init-time Configuration Interface](InitTimeConfigurationInterface.md),
  the support of init-time custom claims is desirable when the TEE hardware has such
  support (e.g., `CONFIGID` in SGX2). The `oe_get_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2`

>   API does not allow developers to provide an init-time custom claim buffer as input.

Author: The [docs](https://github.com/ietf-rats-wg/architecture/blob/master/draft-ietf-rats-architecture.md) only mentions the term "claims".

>   API does not allow developers to provide an init-time custom claim buffer as input.

Reviewer: Right because I think the notion of "init time custom claims" is really an SGX-specific artifact that RATS solves in a more general way, if I understand init time custom claims correctly.  In RATS layered attestation, configuration data can be another layer from the enclave itself.  SGX and OE historically has not supported layered attestation and instead had (has) an SGX-only model.  Once you support layered attestation, you have a much more general solution that does not need any special term for this.

   * to interpret the buffer depends on the agreement between the relying party and the verifier.
   *
   * @experimental
   *
   * @param[in] format_id The format id of the evidence to be generated.
   * @param[in] subject_name A string containing an X.509 distinguished
   * name (DN) for customizing the generated certificate. This name is also used
   * as the issuer name because this is a self-signed certificate.
   * See RFC5280 (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280) for details.
   * Example value "CN=Open Enclave SDK,O=OESDK TLS,C=US"
   * @param[in] private_key A private key used to sign this certificate.
   * @param[in] private_key_size The size of the buffer above.
   * @param[in] public_key A public key used as the certificate's subject key.
   * @param[in] public_key_size The size of the buffer above.
   * @param[in] attestation_results_buffer An optional flat buffer representing the attestation
   * results from a verifier.
   * @param[in] attestation_results_buffer_size The size of the buffer above in bytes.
   * @param[in] optional_parameters The optional format-specific input parameters.
   * @param[in] optional_parameters_size The size of buffer above in bytes.

>    * @param[out] output_certificate A pointer to buffer pointer.

Reviewer 2: Rename `output_certificate` to `output_certificate_in_der`?

   * @param[out] output_certificate_size The pointer to the size of the buffer above.
   *
   * @return OE_OK The operation was successful.
   */
  oe_result_t oe_get_passport_attestation_certificate(
      const oe_uuid_t* format_id,
      const unsigned char* subject_name,
      const uint8_t* private_key,
      size_t private_key_size,
      const uint8_t* public_key,
      size_t public_key_size,
      const uint8_t* attestion_results_buffer,
      size_t attestation_results_buffer_size,
      uint8_t** output_certificate,
      size_t* output_certificate_size);
  ```
  The API generates a certificate with an embedded attestation results that is specifically used
  by an attested TLS with the passport model.

>   An important note is that the API does not enforce the binding between the

Reviewer 3: Is there a reason for not enforcing the binding?

Author: In the passport model, the enforcement requires
- The attester enforces the binding into the evidence, sends to the verifier, and uses the returned attestation results to generate the certificate
- The relying party extracts the attestation results from the certificate, and validates the binding.

The above two steps require the attester and the relying party agree on a specific format of the attestation results (e.g., MAA otkens). OE currently does not have APIs support a specific verifier, which can surely be added in the future.

Reviewer: In some cases the attester might need to "know" to ask the verifier for format in a particular format needed by a relying party (e.g., to ask for them in JWT vs CWT format), but it doesn't need to understand the format itself (in terms of ability to parse it) since it is an opaque buffer to the attester.

  public key and the attestation results as `oe_get_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` does. The

>   attester and the relying party are responsible to enforce and verify the binding, respectively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  attester and the relying party are responsible for enforcing and verifying the binding, respectively.
```

   * @param[in] subject_name A string containing an X.509 distinguished
   * name (DN) for customizing the generated certificate. This name is also used
   * as the issuer name because this is a self-signed certificate.
   * See RFC5280 (https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280) for details.
   * Example value "CN=Open Enclave SDK,O=OESDK TLS,C=US"
   * @param[in] private_key A private key used to sign this certificate.
   * @param[in] private_key_size The size of the buffer above.
   * @param[in] public_key A public key used as the certificate's subject key.
   * @param[in] public_key_size The size of the buffer above.
   * @param[in] inittime_custom_claims_buffer An optional flat buffer representing the init-time
   * custom claims.
   * @param[in] inittime_custom_claims_buffer_size The size of the buffer above in bytes.
   * @param[in] runtime_custom_claims_buffer An optional flat buffer representing the run-time
   * cutom claims.
   * @param[in] runtime_custom_claims_buffer_size The size of the buffer above in bytes.
   * @param[in] optional_parameters The optional format-specific input parameters.
   * @param[in] optional_parameters_size The size of buffer above in bytes.

>    * @param[out] output_certificate A pointer to buffer pointer.

Reviewer 2: Rename output_certificate to output_certificate_in_der?

  developers to optionally pass in run- and init-time custom claims.
  - `runtime_custom_claims_buffer`
  - `runtime_custom_claims_buffer_size`
  - `inittime_custom_claims_buffer`
  - `inittime_custom_claims_buffer_size`

  Note that the API assumes `runtime_custom_claims_buffer` and `inittime_custom_claims_buffer`
  are opaque buffer whose format is application-specific, depending on the agreement between parties involve
  in the attestation procedure. However, to maintain the binding between the public key and the
  evidence, the caller of the API is responsible to include the public key into the `runtime_custom_claims_buffer`
  and. Also, the relying party should agree on the format with the attester to extract the public key from
  the `runtime_custom_claims_buffer`. Note that, to provide backward compatibility with
  existing `oe_verify_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v2` API, the caller of the API needs to ensure
  that the `runtime_custom_claims_buffer` includes exactly the public key.
  
- oe_parse_attestation_certificate
  ```c
  /**
   * oe_parse_attestation_certificate
   *
   * This function parses the certificate generated by

>    * oe_get_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v3 and

Reviewer 3: There is no `oe_get_attestation_certificate_with_evidence_v3`

      uint8_t** output_runtime_custom_claims_buffer,
      size_t*8 uint8_t output_runtime_custom_claims_buffer_size,
      uint8_t** output_attestation_results_buffer,
      size_t* uint8_t output_attestation_results_buffer_size);
  ```
  The API is used to parse the certificate generated by `oe_get_passport_attestation_certificate`
  or `oe_get_background_check_attestation_certificate`. An alternative design is representing
  the output buffers in a list of claims (reducing the number of arguments). However, given that the
  design does not provide APIs to interpret these buffers therefore the decision is not introdcing
  pre-defined claims types for them.

User Experience
--------

The following examples demonstrate the use of proposed APIs.

- Passport Model

  ```c
  static const uint8_t inittime_custom_claims[] =
    { 0x00, 0x01, 0x02, 0x03, 0x04, 0x05, 0x06, 0x07,
      0x08, 0x09, 0x0a, 0x0b, 0x0c, 0x0d, 0x0e, 0x0f };
  ...

  // Attester
  uint8_t* runtime_custom_claims = public_key; /* Enforce the binding */
  uint8_t* runtime_custom_claims_buffer_size = public_key_size;
  uint8_t* attestation_results_buffer = NULL;
  size_t attestation_results_buffer_size = 0;

>   // Send the evidence, init-time custom claims, and run-time custom claims

Reviewer 3: Is there a recommended pattern for sending the information to the verifier?

Author: Will update the comments here. One should either uses the interface provided by a specific verifier or OE can provide API that supports it.

>   // to the verifier. The results are saved in the attestation_results_buffer.

Reviewer 3: Would this involve a "non-attested" tls between the verifier and the attester?

Author: This depends on the requirement of the verifier. For example, MAA does not require the channel to be authenticated.

  uint8_t* output_certificate = NULL;
  size_t output_certificate_size = 0;

  ...

  result = oe_get_passport_attestation_certificate(
       &format,
       (const unsigned char*)"CN=Open Enclave SDK,O=OESDK TLS,C=US",
       private_key,
       private_key_size,
       public_key,
       public_key_size,
       attestation_results_buffer,
       attestation_results_buffer_size,
       &output_certificate,
       &output_certificate_size);
  OE_CHECK(result);

  ...

>   Send output_certificate to the relying party during the TLS handshake

Reviewer 3: How does this happen? What are the APIs in mbedtls/OpenSSL that would allow this?

Author: This is the same as how the attested tls works today: configuring the SSL/TLS data structure using the generated certificate.

  ...

>   // Relying party (receive input_certificate)

Reviewer 3: What are the hook-points in mbedtls/OpenSSL that allow the relying party to extract the certificate?

Author: Certificate can be obtained during the standard TLS handshake. Both Mbed TLS/OpenSSL allows server/client to implement a callback that verifies the certificate.

https://github.com/openenclave/openenclave/blob/641288ea0b837e55292a3c120302157aee47c603/samples/attested_tls/server/enc/mbedtls_server.cpp#L97

https://github.com/openenclave/openenclave/blob/641288ea0b837e55292a3c120302157aee47c603/samples/attested_tls/server/enc/openssl_server.cpp#L165

  uint8_t* attestation_results_buffer;
  size_t attestation_results_buffer_size;

  result = oe_parse_attestation_certificate(
       input_certificate,
       input_certificate_size,
       NULL,
       NULL,
       NULL,
       NULL,
       NULL,
       NULL,
       &attestation_results_buffer,
       &attestation_results_buffer_size);
  OE_CHECK(result);
  
  ...

  Validate the attestation results
  Check the public key against the attestation results
  ...

  ```

- Background-Check Model

  ```c
  static const uint8_t inittime_custom_claims[] =
    { 0x00, 0x01, 0x02, 0x03, 0x04, 0x05, 0x06, 0x07,
      0x08, 0x09, 0x0a, 0x0b, 0x0c, 0x0d, 0x0e, 0x0f };
  ...

  // Attester
  uint8_t* runtime_custom_claims = public_key; /* Enforce the binding */
  uint8_t* runtime_custom_claims_buffer_size = public_key_size;
  uint8_t* output_certificate = NULL;
  size_t output_certificate_size = 0;

  ...

  result = oe_get_background_check_attestation_certificate(
       &format,

>        (const unsigned char*)"CN=Open Enclave SDK,O=OESDK TLS,C=US",

Reviewer 3: Does CN have to be this value?

Author: No. Just that existing verification APIs require it.
